\documentclass{article}

\pagestyle{empty}

\begin{document}

\noindent Brent Yorgey \\
Statement of teaching philosophy \\
\today
\bigskip

As a teacher, my primary job is not to impart knowledge, but to create
\emph{welcoming communities of learning} in which students can have
\emph{transformative encounters with beautiful ideas}.  XXX Learning does
not take place in a vacuum, but is fundamentally relational.

Welcome: the sad fact in computer science is that many students never
even make it in the door.  Of course this applies particularly in the
case of women and minorities, and also, more broadly, to anyone who
feels for some reason that they do not ``belong''.  This sense of
belonging---or not belonging---can come from many places, but I
believe that teachers have a large part to play.  I strive to make my
courses into welcoming communities---places where every student feels
they can belong, and indeed that there is something to belong to.  In
a course I designed and taught at Penn, ``The Art of Recursion'', I
tried to foster this kind of community in several ways.  First, I used
the unusual format of alternating lectures and student-led
discussions: every week we devoted an entire class period to having
randomly chosen students present their solutions to homework problems
and then lead the class in discussing them.  Second, we spent time at
the beginning of the semester explicitly discussing the sort of
community we wanted to create and how to go about it.  In the end, it
resulted in an amazing amount of respectful interaction, discussion,
and collaboration.  XXX tried to model for them??

Another way I create welcoming communities is by the way that I
acknowledge and deal with failure.  Failure is unavoidable in any
human endeavor, and especially so in an environment emphasizing
creativity and exploration.  XXX? I also recognize my own constant
failings as a teacher, as I explore subjects along with my students
and discover (sometimes successfully and sometimes less so) how best
to guide them.  This recognition informs how I strive to interact with
students experiencing failure of one sort or another, from a missed
question to a missed semester: fairly, not shying away from the
failure or its consequences, but with compassion, grace, and second
chances.

Secondly, once a community of learning is created, it would be a waste
to simply impart information: my goal is to afford students the
opportunity to have \emph{transformative encounters with beautiful
  ideas}.  Marvelling at beautiful ideas is one my biggest personal
motivations in both research and teaching.  This comes across in the
classroom in a number of ways.  I try to illustrate topics in fun and
creative ways: with an appropriate picture or diagram, with props,
with audience participation.  I've taught middle school students about
finite automata using magic markers and giant sheets of paper on the
floor.  I've taught recursion using a bowl full of marbles and a ball
of twine.  I've had a confederate ``interrupt'' class with an
apparently inane request which later turned out to illustrate a key
concept.  In short, I try to stimulate many different modes of
learning, and help students develop intuition for big ideas, rather
than getting lost in a maze of facts.

Wanting students to encounter beautiful ideas means that I also
emphasize self-discovery. I am a big proponent of ``inquiry-based
learning'' approaches, where students are the primary drivers of the
learning process. Students remember ideas they discover for
themselves, because they understand the motivation and how the idea
fits into a larger context. I didn't tell the middle school students
that they were learning about finite automata---I just let them play!
The sorts of content-driven, lecture-based courses I teach can make
this difficult, but I try my best to engage students' faculties of
discovery by assigning open-ended projects, encouraging questions, and
interspersing lectures with small-group or individual problem solving
sessions.  I often introduce new topics in the form of a challenging
problem to be solved, then sit back and watch the students hash out a
solution among themselves.  Ten minutes of false starts, arguments,
insights, and eventual triumph are worth more than ten hours of
lecturing!

Above all, I try to convey an appreciation for beautiful ideas,
not to receptacles of knowledge but to human beings. A student will
almost certainly forget all the details of a proof or definition or
technique.  But if they remember the beautiful nugget of insight it
represents, and where it fits within the larger context of the
subject---then I will have truly taught them something.
XXX weave community theme into this as well.

My extraordinary commitment to teaching is evidenced by the way I have
consistently gone beyond expectations and requirements, and the awards
I have won.  Computer science PhD students at Penn are only required
to serve as a teaching assistant for two semesters; during my time at
Penn I served as a teaching assistant for three semesters, choosing
courses where I would have real teaching duties rather than simply
grading.  I was awarded a Teaching Practicum Award, given every year
to several PhD students in the CS department in recognition of their
outstanding effort and enthusiasm as a TA.  However, I didn't stop
there---I went on to design and teach two other undergraduate courses
myself. The first, a half-credit introduction to the Haskell
programming language, I taught three times, XXX popular course.  I
also created an experimental full-credit course entitled ``The Art of
Recursion'', exploring the theory and practice of recursion from a
number of viewpoints.  My efforts were recognized with the Penn Prize
for Excellence in Teaching by Graduate Students, a prestigious,
student-nominated award given yearly to ten graduate students selected
from across all of Penn's graduate programs.

I take every opportunity to reflect upon and improve my
teaching. During my time at Penn I obtained a teaching certificate
through Penn's Center for Teaching and Learning, which involved
participation in a number of workshops, a formal teaching observation,
and a capstone seminar.  I am also an active participant in an
informal seminar for graduate students interested in CS education,
where we discuss various issues in education and give each other
feedback and encouragement in our teaching.



\end{document}
